

(1) If  you  struggle  to  understand  the  book,  it's  likely  that  I'm  just  over- complicating  and  over-analyzing  everything.  Some  like  that,  some  don't. My life looks very similar to other extreme early retirees. Indeed, I've never thought so much about the concepts in this book as when I was writing it. Ordinarily, I don't use mind maps to fry an egg and I don't have a strategy for putting on socks. I do have a strategy for  buying  socks, though. I  buy them all in the same color and form. That way I don't have to match them up  pair  by  pair  while  doing  laundry, and  if  one  sock  fails,  I  don't  have  to throw out the other one. 

(2) This idea follows from the belief from the Dark Ages that the best way to gain knowledge was to read and interpret 1,000-year-old books, something which still occurs in the humanities, though now it has taken to analyzing modern authors. 

(3) Also  I  found  that  the  "quadrants"  in  Economic  degrees  of  freedom  are similar  to  the  Cashflow Quadrant  book  by  Robert  Kiyosaki  even  as  they were  inspired  by  the  types  described  in  Maccoby's  earlier  book  The Gamesman and the arrangement itself (the dimensions) comes from Charles Perrow's  Normal  Accident  Theory.  It's  also  possible  to  identify  the "working man" with the working class or the working poor, the "salaryman" with  the middle class, the "businessman" with the capitalist class,  and  the "Renaissance  man"  with  the  creative  class  in  modern  sociology.  In  feudal Japan,  the  four  types  were  the  gentry  (samurai),  farmers,  artisans,  and merchants.  Richard  Bartle's  Players  to  Suit  MUDs  is  an  interesting  paper analyzing  the  four  different  types  of  computer  game  players--killers, socializers,  explorers,  and  achievers--classified  according  to  their preference  for  acting with  or  acting  on  other  players  or  the  game  world, respectively. That paper will teach you everything you need to know about management theory. 

(4) Modern  movie  watchers  might  prefer  the  film  "The  Matrix," which  has  a similar premise. 

(5) Thanks  to  government-induced  inflation  of  the  money  supply,  this  is  a growing  number.  $1  million  now  is  considered  insufficient  by  a  growing number of people, even though most people will never accumulate such a sum. 

(6) The average American produces a little less than a ton of waste each  year. Approximately  12%  gets  incinerated  (plastic  bottles),  33%  gets  recycled (metal,  garden  waste,  etc.),  and  55%  ends  up  in  a  landfill.  Given  normal consumer  behavior,  most  department  store  contents  end  up  in  a  landfill within  a  decade.  Being  compacted  and  anaerobic--think  vacuum-packed-- landfills  are  more  like  tombs  than  composting  facilities.  In  a  study conducted  by  University  of  Arizona  researchers  found  25-year-old  still- recognizable hot dogs in a landfill. When future archaeologists dig through the  remains  of  our  civilization,  one  of  the  things  they  will  find  are  the ceramics,  since  ceramics  are  very  stable  compounds.  Some  of  the  biggest and  most  solid  ceramic  objects  in  our  landfills  just  happen  to  be  toilet bowls.  This  may  be  our  legacy,  our  equivalent  to  the  statues  on  Easter Island. 

(7) Frogs  are  a  leading  pollution  indicator  and  are  becoming  threatened  by extinction at an alarming rate. 

(8) On the other hand, there have been a few examples of the converse holding- -if  you  buy  your  way  into  a  top-ranked  university,  you  can  still  succeed (make a lot of money) despite obvious lack of talent. 

(9) This euphemism typically means that your career is on the line if you don't obey and take the "opportunity." 

(10) Visit  the  website  of  The  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  for  more  data  on consumer spending. 

(11) If you don't believe me, try to give someone that isn't close to you a present you either bought used or that you made yourself. 

(12) govern, v. To control, restrain, retard, or regulate. 

(13) Although  they  do  increase  efficiency  in  terms  of  productivity  per  time worked, as shown in the section on sigmoids. 

(14) J. Vanek, Time spent in housework, Scientific American, 231,5 (1975) 116- 120 

(15) As  profit  is  desirable,  at  least  to  the  owners,  without  whom  the  business would not exist in the first place, shifting these cash flows around  in  time has therefore created an entire industry, the financial service industry, which until  the  recent  stock  market  crash  comprised  20%  of  the  entire  US economy  in  terms  of  market  capitalization  and  40%  of  GDP  at  the  peak. This means that 20% of the economy was dedicated to moving money from person A to person B while taking a cut to do so (see this figure in Financial cash flow cycles). Needless to say, if 20% of a country's effort is spent on rearranging  cash  flows  rather  than  on  actually  producing  goods  and services, this effort had better result in at least 20% more productivity for the "real" economy. 

(16) For the economics geeks, the availability of credit increases the velocity of money,  which  makes  money  more  available,  and  thus  decreases  its  value relative to goods. 

(17) Even  greater  distortions  obtain  if  a  debt-driven  society  interacts  with  a cash-based  society.  When  the  debt-driven  society  imports  relatively  cheap goods from the cash-driven society, it leads to overconsumption. The debt-- claims on  future  production--gets  exported  to  the  cash-driven  society.  The repayments  make  the  debt-driven  country  poorer  which  reduces  demand and  thus  acts  as  a  restoring  balance.  The  balancing  and  the  occasional overshoot can be financially devastating, though, particularly to the country in debt. 

(18) A plane has three degrees, pitch -> up/down, yaw -> left/right, and roll -> clockwise/counterclockwise. 

(19) It  should  be  noted  that  a  great  amount  of  effort  has  gone  into  linearizing scientific work to make progress predictable and measurable. This has been achieved  by  using  annual  evaluations,  a  promotion  system  based  on  the quantity of publications, and milestones to force progress to occur in small incremental  steps,  thus  making  changes  approximately  linear.  Science  no longer progresses in the leaps and bounds of masters, but rather slowly and persistently through an army of methodically progressing journeymen. This approach to research eventually leads to the point where people know more and more about less and less, which basically means that the forest is lost amidst the detailed study of trees. 

(20) Lately,  salary  men  have  realized  the  virtues  of  creating  a  buffer  between their salaries and their obligations as layoffs have become more common. 

(21) There  is  a  tendency  to  declare  the  present  the  pinnacle  of  evolution,  but given  that  the  idea  of  relying  on  so-called"human  ingenuity"  to  solve problems is a few hundred years old, that industrialism, imported tea, and canned soup are more than 100 years old, and that it's a good 40 years since man  last  walked  in  the  moon,  I  claim  that  from  a  secular,  macro perspective, it has been a long time since anything radical has happened. In other  words,  if  you  took  a  person  from  the  19th  century  and  transplanted them into the 21st century, the shift in culture would not be immense--only the change in technology would be. 

(22) It is also interesting to observe that practically all the proposed solutions for the  systemic  problems  caused  by  technology  such  as  overpopulation, climate change, and pollution, are technological in nature. 

(23) If you substitute kings with national governments, religion with the myth of progress and economic growth, and superstition with the widespread belief in technological fixes supplied by a small group of people, who are mostly unable  to  explain  their  knowledge  to  outsiders,  you'll  see  that  this  world was  perhaps  more  similar  than  dissimilar  to  the  modern  world.  While modern people believe in different things, they believe in the same way as before and relate to their institutions in much the same way. 

(24) When suggesting a direction for the future I think many authors make the mistake of envisioning a top-down approach to what society and the people in  it  should  look  and  behave  like--typically  an  idealized  utopia  that  is perhaps  subconsciously  reflective  of  the  author's  values  and  ideas. However,  if  you  accept  that  succession  (see  Succession  and  the  cycle  of change)  describes  how  society  evolves,  it's  clear  that  large-scale  change comes about only once the system adapts to the new "species" of humans with different behaviors. Since the societal adaptation is slow, it's therefore clear  that  individuals  who  desire  to  change  their  life  need  a  bottom-up approach,  as  they  have  to  function  within  society's  existing  framework. Therefore an individual strategy that depends on a yet-to-exist world is of little use. 

(25) A  caveat  for  those  planning  to  pioneer  a  new  world-changing  lifestyle, though: It is worth keeping in mind that some pioneer ideas will eventually be  leveraged  and  used  to  first  control  the  masses  until  the  masses understand  and  start  gaming  the  rules,  rather  than  following  the  original pioneering philosophy. 

(26) Due to  the  explosive  compound growth  of  the  human  population  over  the past  couple  centuries,  there  are  now  more  scientists  living  today  than  the total number of scientists who have ever been born. 

(27) Or at least we used to. I'm sure that someone with too much time on their hands has found a more politically correct word by now. 

(28) Sometimes a "housewife" salary is calculated by summing up market rates for similar services; this may be one way to do it. 

(29) See,  for  example,  The  Cambridge  Handbook  of  Expertise  and  Expert Performance by Ericsson et. al., Cambridge University Press, 2006. 

(30) Currently buy and hold index investing and exchange-traded funds. 

(31) Assuming that income > expenses! 

(32) Typical prices are 1-2% of assets per year! 

(33) I'm guilty as charged. 

(34) Students and conference attendants take note! 

(35) You  do  not  understand  quantum  physics  until  you  can  explain  it  to  your mother--presuming that she is not a physicist! that makes it a need and only that. It's not an absolute need. 

(46) If you think this example is farfetched, you're probably older than 30. 

(47) Maybe it could serve as a ramp of some sort for dogs? 

(48) Conversely, turning a few old microwave ovens into a welding machine can be done faster than working to buy a welder outright. 

(49) This is very true for programming. Once you have the right data structure for the problem, the program becomes much easier to write. 

(50) This  can  be  and  was  used  to  make  laundry  detergent  which  is  as  good  as modern detergents but at 5% of the cost. 

(51) Chlorine gas also burns explosively with hydrogen, much like pure oxygen. It  was  a  combination  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen  that  blew  the  roof  off  the Chernobyl reactor. 

(52) Overcompensating in terms of quantity (rarely quality) is a popular pastime because it fits well with the accumulation culture. A dinner set for 12? Well, if  you  feed  12  people  on  a  regular  basis,  of  course  it  makes  sense.  If  you only  feed  12  people  once  a  year,  take  them  to  a  restaurant  and  feed  them there.  Alternatively,  ask  them  to  bring  their  own  silverware.  It  is  okay  to break consumer customs. 

(53) It  will  work  given  a  lot  of  patience,  but  often  this  patience  is  hard  to achieve. 

(54) Note  that  since  there  are  three terms--write  out  the parentheses--the  shape of  the  solution  can  be  controlled  by  just  two  parameters,  for  example, (dP)/(dE)=aP(1-bP),  since  the  third  would  just  act  as  a  scale.  This  means that two parameters can be used to fit the form of the curve to any problem whose structure fits this model. 

(55) Most people store their stuff in their main residence. However, other places include the workplace, which may be a good place to store your technical books or tools, or dedicated storage units. Renting a storage unit  will  very likely cost less than an equivalent apartment/house with one more bedroom. 

(56) This is why, as a general rule, I restrict storage usage to 3/4 of full capacity; it  makes  it  much  easier  to  fit  things  in  (see  Decoupling  and  increasing complexity). 

(57) Effectively,  only  a  fraction  of  the  things  we  own  contribute  to  our  actual quality of life. These are the things we use on a daily basis (see How to get rid of things). 

(58) If  you  want  to  get  fancy,  you  can  add  inflation  and  opportunity  costs. However, the result will still be close to a couple bucks. 

(59) No, I'm not being paid to promote these items. I just like them. 

(60) Getting  actively  engaged  in  the  community  later  led  to  a  book  deal,  The Final  Energy  Crisis,  Pluto  Press,  2005,  and  several  connections  with international experts. 

(61) Durability depends on quality, but first and foremost on whether you use a dryer instead of a clothesline. Consider all the lint the dryer picks up during the  process;  these  are  clothing  fibers  that  come  from  clothes.  Line-drying doesn't  result  in  a  similar  "sanding."  With  line-drying,  you're  closer  to  a 200-wash  life  cycle.  If  you  hand-wash  or  at  least  run  a  gentler  cycle,  you may reach even higher numbers. 

(62) This  happens  because  manufactures  assume  that  the  item  is  going  to  be thrown  away  rather  than  repaired,  and  thus  they  have  ensured  that  no particular parts are overbuilt. 

(63) This  can  be  a  great  idea  when  you  don't  want  to  own  the  thing--for example,  toxic  cleaners,  cars,  etc.  It  isn't  great  if  you  want  fee-less ownership. 

(64) My  local  library  has  a  web  page  showing  new  additions  to  their  movie catalog for the most recent month. 

(65) When shopping online, the newest strategy is to use computers to analyze shopping  trends  and  offer  different  prices  to  different  people  on  different days.  Using  limit  orders  avoids  this.  If  you  want  to  beat  the  system,  try reloading the page or delete the site cookies and try again. 

(66) Lest I give the impression that the skilled trades are really that easy, let me say that they're easy in principle, but quickly discovering what the problem is  requires  a  large  collection  of  tacit  knowledge.  Without  this  knowledge, the apprentice will have to try a lot of possible solutions before hitting on the  right  one.  In  other  words,  the  expert  will  be  able  to  do  the  same  job much faster, but the apprentice will actually be able to do the job about as well--it will just take much longer. 

(67) Fighting succession requires  a  lot  of  resources  to  prevent  the  next  natural seral stage. Letting succession work for you saves a lot of money (also see Succession and the cycle of change). 

(68) Obviously  this  number  varies  wildly  as  real  estate  has  a  very  large  price range depending on location. In some parts of the United States you can get a  mansion  with  a  few  acres  and  a  lake  for  the  price  of  a  bungalow  in  the pricier areas. 

(69) For example, a motorhome or a boat is a home under those conditions, and thus interest on a loan for such would be tax-deductible. Also, there may be other benefits of the politically influential homeowner class to be had. 

(70) The same goes for doing IPOs and buying and selling stocks on Wall Street. 

(71) Many  times  the  argument  is  made  that  the  interest  can  be  deducted (government subsidies). However, if the tax bracket is 25%, then paying the bank $100 to save $25 in taxes for a net loss of $75 still seems like a losing deal. If you were in a 100% tax bracket, it would obviously be a great idea. 

(72) Maintaining a bike in wet conditions requires about 15 minutes after each trip wiping it down, so it may be faster to leave the bike at home. 

(73) If appearances are important, wear an expensive suit or develop some other luxury eccentricity. It's certainly less expensive than housing. 

(74) Radiative  (warm  and  cold  sources  in  your  vicinity),  conductive  (ambient temperature),  evaporative  (humidity  and  ability  to  sweat),  and  convective (wind  chill)  heat  transfers.  With  so  many  variables,  there  are  several solutions. 

(75) Four layers could be an undershirt, a shirt, a sweater, and a suit jacket for the top. For the legs, long underwear and tweed pants. For the feet, double layer socks. Finally a scarf to round out the intellectual look. 

(76) The most efficient wardrobe will typically be based on the above mentioned base colors. It can be expanded by adding a color/shade that goes well with your skin tone, eye color, hair color, etc. This step is not necessary if you're okay  with  a  bland  style.  For  bags,  belts,  and  shoes  stick  with  one  color. Black matches everything, but brown is more casual. 

(77) Perhaps being surrounded by madness redefines madness as normal, while making  depression  and  other  health  issues  a  natural  response  to  an unnatural situation? In other words, is it really healthy to be adjusted to an unhealthy culture? I say no. 

(78) Imagine how a health care system that focused on promoting health rather than treating diseases or symptoms would look. It would not be a particular institution  or  corporation.  It  would  be  a  system  which  was  completely integrated with everyday life to form healthy habits. 

(79) If the food energy is not burned, it must be stored--think of the fuel tank as being  made  out  of  expanding  nonrupturing  rubber,  making  an  overflow impossible.  As  food  is  eaten  but  not  burned,  it's  stored  in  the  tank  as  fat. Fortunately, storing more fuel makes the body spend more energy to carry it around. This is perhaps not as comfortable for the "owner" of the body, as it detracts from the handling characteristic, but it prevents the fuel tank from growing  infinitely  large  as  the  increased  amount  of  calories  required  to carry it around eventually matches the caloric intake. 

(80) On  a  parallel  note,  The  United  States  used  to  be  known  for  its  auto companies.  Today,  some  of  the  biggest  industrial  companies  are  in  the business  of  selling  junk  food  and  cholesterol-lowering  drugs.  Food  for thought? 

(81) Jogging  means  speeds  between  10  minutes  per  mile  and  15  minutes  per mile. Anything faster is running. Anything slower is walking. 

(82) The body which has been evolutionarily conditioned over millions of years thinks,  "I'm  being  pursued  and  I  don't  get  to  eat  much.  How  do  I  survive this? Better hang on to the energy I already have. How do I do that? First, by  storing  all  the  fat  close  to  the  muscles  where  it  is  going  to  be  used (thighs and butt). Second, by decreasing muscle mass to its bare necessity-- that is, just enough power to keep me jogging, which is nothing more than a controlled continuous fall forward, and by becoming a more efficient runner to use less energy." 

(83) Compare Anakin Skywalker to Luke Skywalker. 

(84) In itself, the biceps are fairly useless muscles which mainly act as support to  hold  the  elbow  joint  together  when  pulling  a  heavy  load.  In  the  past,  a large bicep thus suggested that the functional muscles of the back and torso, which  aren't  immediately  apparent  when  seen  from  the  front,  were  really strong.  Similarly,  the  pectorals,  which  are  visible  from  the  front,  aren't  as useful  as  the  triceps  and  shoulders  are  for  pushing.  Large  pectorals  thus suggested  very  strong  triceps  and  shoulders.  Definition--that  is,  the visibility  of  muscles  under  the  skin,  usually  achieved  through  a combination of diet and exercise before a contest or a photo shoot, suggests that muscles are larger than they actually are. Tanned skin enhances contrast and shadows, further enhancing the effect. 

(85) The  reason  is  that  a  chain  is  no  stronger  than  its  weakest  link,  and  by isolating  muscles,  stabilizer  muscles  remain  underworked  and  thus  they'll limit the weight that can be lifted without sitting down or pulling/pushing in a particular direction. In real life, you rarely get to lie under the weight and get a good wide grip with both hands on a thin bar. 

(86) Use lots of tape and double bag the sand. 

(87) For weight loss it's much more important to consider total calories burned versus  total  calories  eaten.  It's  much  better  to  burn  300kcal  in  a  high- intensity workout than it is to burn 250kcal in a low-intensity workout. The latter will burn a greater fraction of fat during the exercise, but there will be 50kcal left on the table. 

(88) It is quite sad to realize that we have become so sedentary that most  of us are  far  from  this  goal.  For  example,  looking  in  an  old  school  strength training manual, I found that being able to press your own bodyweight to an overhead position was merely considered "good," and that a "man-building" exercise  constituted  10  clean  and  jerk  repetitions  with  two  80-pound dumbbells.  Many  modern  gyms  don't  offer  free  weights  above  50  pounds because  doing  so  would  apparently  contradict  the  "family-friendly"  image they want to promote. 

(89) Push-ups  are  a  rather  poor  measure  of  overall  performance,  although  one can certainly do far worse; for push-ups, this is roughly equivalent to doing 115 push ups in the alloted time. 

(90) There  are  a  lot  of  exercise  myths.  First,  you  can  make  a  muscle  larger and/or  stronger  or  smaller  and/or  weaker.  You  can't  make  it  longer  or otherwise  change  its  shape  without  surgery.  Toning  refers  to  the  state  of your  muscle  contraction.  When  couch  potatoes  exercise,  their  muscles initially tend to tighten up. This state of bliss lasts a couple of weeks unless the  intensity  is  continuously  stepped  up;  and  you  can't  keep  doing  this. Unfortunately, toning is often confused with definition, that is, the ability to see muscles under the fat and skin. This leads to the spot reduction myth. Just  as  it  is  impossible  to  lengthen  a  muscle  unless  you  undergo  surgery, you can't spot reduce without surgery. The body uses the most easy-to-get fat first--typically the fat on the face, forearms, and calves; and the stubborn fat  last--typically  on  the  belly  and  hips  (love  handles).  All  you  can  do  is reduce overall fat. 

(91) This  is  the  reason  restaurants  serve  high-glycemic  foods  like  bread  or tortillas and then make you wait a long time to order, in the hopes that you have developed a sense of hunger or, more euphemistically, worked up an appetite. 

(92) "Intermittent  fasting  dissociates  beneficial  effects  of  dietary  restriction  on glucose metabolism and neuronal resistance to injury from calorie intake.," R.M. Anson et. al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 100(2003)6216. 

(93) It's therefore possible to eat a simple diet consisting of just a few different kinds of properly designed meals, as long as they include all the necessary macro and micronutrients. However, the general recommendation is to eat a varied  diet,  for  the  same  reason  people  are  told  to  buy  index  funds  when investing--namely, a lack of knowledge. By eating a wide, random selection of what is sold in the market, it's believed that all needs will be covered. In a  similar  vein,  much  can  be  done  to  alleviate  the  effects  of  diabetes  by avoiding all high-glycemic food. However, again people are told to eat the normal varied diet because it's believed to be easier to teach them to inject insulin  before  each  meal  than  it  is  to  restrict  their  diet  and  internalize  an admittedly  long  list  of  glycemic  indices.  And  given  the  one-size-fits-all approach, the institutions are probably correct. Knowledgeable individuals may make better personal choices, however. 

(94) I  hate  to  sound  like  a  Luddite,  but  from  the  perspective  of  financial  and consumer  independence,  nearly  everything  was  done  better  in  the  "old days." Many modern innovations are only an improvement insofar as one is a  shareholder  of  the  company  producing  them  (See  Foundations  of economics and finance). 

(95) Take  care  of  cast  iron  pans  and  they  will  last  a  lifetime--that  is,  your lifetime. 

(96) Someone who is used to walking will clock just under 4mph on a sustained basis.  Sedentary people  or  hikers  who  are  not  used  to  fast  walking  barely reach 2mph. 

(97) This is not compensating for the likelihood that the cyclist is likely healthier than  a  sedentary  driver  and  is  thus  inherently  expected  to  live  better  and longer. 

(98) These pertain to US traffic regulations and generally don't hold in Europe. 

(99) If  we  have,  unknownst  to  me,  reached  the  point  of  personal  bathroom assistants, I don't want to know about it. 

(100) Check out www.earlyretirementextreme.com. 

(101) Although I must admit that practically all TV shows show people living a high-consumption  lifestyle,  and  while  they  may  have  all  sorts  of interpersonal problems, they never seem to have any money problems. 

(102) Libertarians (believing in low economic control, low social control) have a similar  problem  when  dealing  with  left-wing  (believing  in  high  economic control,  low  social  control)  people  or  right-wing  (believing  in  low economic  control,  high  social  control)  people.  With  either  group  there  is something  to  agree  with,  but  there  is  also  something  to  disagree  with.  A preference for agreement or truth comes down to personality type. 

(103) They are finite on time scales shorter than geologic time scales. 

(104) In a capitalistic society, this option is not open to all, but neither is working (100% employment). 

(105) If  you haven't  started  making  money yet, seriously  consider  getting into a field  with guaranteed  income potential. About  the worst  thing anyone can do  financially  is  to  spend  four  years  piling  up  student  loans for  a  degree with a low starting salary. Here it's not so much the starting salary which is the problem as it's the debt. If you're going to finance a degree, you better calculate the internal rate of return first. 

(106) For  example,  I'm  a  freelance  editor  and  I  bring  in  a  few  hundred  bucks  a month  whenever  the  mood  strikes,  but  I  could  theoretically  make  a  six- figure  income  if  I  put  in  the  same  effort  as  I  used  to  put  into  my  salaried job. 

(107) Business students may note that this equation is very similar to the formula for a fixed rate mortgage. Reading further along, mortgage holders will then realize  why  "mortgage"  is  French  for  "death  pledge."  It's  essentially  a financial construct to keep a person working all his life in exchange for the privilege of owning a large house. Conversely, this financial weapon can be turned  around  and  used  to  become  financially  independent  and  retire extremely early. 

(108) Much like P/E and earnings yield are each other's inverse in stocks. 

(109) Those  who  are  familiar  with  the  equation  of  a  perpetuity may  be  slightly confused about  the (1+i)  term.  The  reason  for  it  is  that  the  withdrawal  of principal  and  the  addition  of  interest  does  not  happen  at  the  same  time. Hence, the portfolio needs an extra boost of (1+i) to make it back up to the traditional perpetuity value after the first withdrawal. 

(110) Anyone  who  can do better than  that should  start  a hedge fund. Consistent outperformance on that level is worth millions. 

(111) There  are  plenty  of  books  describing  how  to  invest  in  stocks,  real  estate, businesses, etc. but this isn't one of them. 

(112) Some will point to low-or no-fee arrangements, but these often have a price in opportunity costs. A consistent underperformance isn't cheap either! 

(113) The  difference  between  an  engineer  and  a  scientist  seems  to  be  that  the scientist  understands  this,  but  the  engineer  does  not,  nor  does  the economist. 

(114) The efficient market theory is such a simplifying assumption. It simply says that  price  equals  value.  Without  this  assumption,  a  person  would  have  to find the value of every company in the stock market. Instead he can simply say  that  the  value  equals  the  price.  This  is  a  genius  insight,  insofar  as  it renders  the  problem  mathematically  tractable,  but  it  isn't  technically  true. It's similar to how the insight that gravity is a two-body force and that the gravitational  force  between  the  sun  and  each  individual  planet  is  much stronger than the force between the individual planets makes it possible to compute  planetary  motion.  In  astrophysics,  this  always  holds  true.  In economics and investing, it  only  holds  in  most  cases. When it doesn't,  we have market bubbles  and crashes. These occur when  a substantial number of  market  participants  start  behaving  according  to  how  the  market  is behaving--that  is,  how  they  themselves  are  behaving.  Their  behavior becomes self-referential without them realizing it! In particular the problem is  now  that  the  average  of  all  investors  is  so  well  tracked  that  a  large fraction of the market responds to the average--and as it very often happens, decisions  are  strongly  influenced  by  what  can  be  measured,  rather  than what should be measured. In other words, the market is guided by factors (trading, retirement savings) outside of what it really is (equity financing of businesses). This should make for more volatility, and  this  is indeed what we see. A great example of this is walking along with a group of people in a new  place,  like  a  resort  or  a  city,  without  a  map.  It  often  happens  that nobody  really  knows  the  way,  but  everybody  thinks  that  somebody  in  the group  knows  the  way.  As  a  result,  the  group  will  walk  along  for  quite  a while,  appearing  to  make  decisions  until  someone  finally  asks  if  anyone actually knows where the group is heading. The ensuing discussion can be quite  amusing:  "I  thought  you  knew  where  we  were  going."  "No,  I  didn't know. I was following you." With the popularization of herd behavior and "crowd performance"-based investment techniques, the market now tends to act in exactly the same way.