Our  culture  was  founded  on  the  idea  that  maximizing  production  equals
maximizing happiness. In the past, pursuing this goal was admirable since any
increase in production resulted in an increase in well-being: better food, better
medicine, better clothing, better housing, better work, and better living. At some
point the focus changed from better to more: more food, more medicine, more
clothing, more bedrooms, more bathrooms, and more work. But can we honestly
say this still results in better living and greater well-being?
The  changing  focus--from  better  to  more--signaled  the  transition  from  a
producer economy to a consumer economy. Whereas the biggest problem of the
producer economy was how to produce and distribute enough goods to survive--
a problem that still hasn't been solved on a global scale--the biggest problem of a
consumer economy is how to clear the market of overproduced goods.
There are two ways to solve this problem: either produce less or increase
consumption. Various strategies for working less, such as more vacation time
and  longer  educations,  decrease  productivity.13  Yet,  there  are  many  more
strategies  for  consuming  more--government  strategies  as  well  as  corporate
strategies.
Government  strategies,  driven  by  the  political  currency  of  popular  votes,
comprise  inflation-inducing  monetary  policies,  which  cause  people  to  spend
their money now rather than save it for later, and fiscal policies, which promote
government projects ranging from military expenditures and wars to job-creating
projects, such as building bridges to nowhere, to direct stimulus packages for the
consumers--formerly known as citizens.
Many  profit-driven  corporate  strategies  are  based  on  fashion,  planned
obsolescence,  unneeded  upgrades,  and  masterful  emotional  manipulation  --
marketing--causing people to continuously replace goods which are still in good
working order.
Although  these  strategies  seem  to  fail  tactically  in  an  almost  predictable
fashion, with booms and busts, recessions and depressions, or simply chronic
mismanagement,  when  centrally  regulated  and  directed,  the  strategies  have
proven immensely powerful on secular time scales. One result is that humanity
has used up half of the oil--an ancient resource generated millions of years ago--
within a span of a century, while measurably affecting the world's biosphere and
climate.  Since  such  resources  are  finite,  these  strategies  can't  be  sustained.
Economic growth--how quickly resources are converted into consumer goods--is
considered  desirable  by  the  economic  profession,  while  biologists,
psychologists, and sociologists are tallying up the losses. However, if individual
companies  measured  growth  in  the  same  way--by  generating  income  while
ignoring that the income is generated by rapidly burning through their capital
assets--shareholders  would  be  protesting.  In  a  world  where  automation  has
eliminated  pride  in  workmanship  from  the  products  and  nobody  has  time  for
much  else  than  work,  status  is  based  on  acquisition  and  accumulation.  The
purchase and consumption of products has become a surrogate for creating and
doing. Self-worth and status, then, are not about intrinsic values such as who you
are, what you can do, or what you know; they're about extrinsic values like what
you can buy, the car you drive, the number of bedrooms and bathrooms in your
home,  and  the  price  tags  on  your  clothes.  Witness  the  popular  shows  about
highly stylized homes with a TV in every room--TV being a way of consuming
your  time  rather  than  your  money--expensive  furniture,  and  art  prints  on  the
walls. Now go and look again, but pay attention to the number of books on the
bookshelves, the tools for the hobby projects, the work in progress spread out on
the desk. There are none. What empty lives these people must live.
Having substituted consumption for creativity and technical skills, shopping
becomes a form of self-actualization--there's no small number of teenage girls
who  associate  personal  growth  with  changing  their  wardrobe--"retail therapy"
becomes an active way of feeling good. Shopping, then, becomes an end in itself
rather than a means to an end. Rather than designing for yourself, purchasing
professional designs or brand name-associated "lifestyles" becomes the preferred
way of expressing who you are, and consumers start connecting with each other
based on the things and brands they buy. Such consumption manifests itself in
different ways.
For  some,  status-driven  experiences  are  sought  out.  Rather  than  refining
experiences, like learning to identify bird songs during a walk in the park, new
and more exorbitant experiences are sought out, and travel agencies are happy to
offer  them  up.  Many  such  trips  resemble  harried  business  trips  rather  than
relaxing vacations. "Work hard, play hard."
Others  attempt  to  create  meaning  through  collecting;  that  is,  a  systematic
form of hoarding. Entire industries have been created that appeal to the hoarding
instinct, creating things to collect with no use value whatsoever. These things
don't even have any intrinsic or collectible value, but consumers collect them
anyway and work hard to do so.
For many, status is associated with expensive items thought to be fitting for
someone with a higher salary. Certain jobs are associated with certain levels of
spending. This means that the price itself is often considered a complementary
good--the item is considered desirable simply because it's expensive. This locks
one into a spiral of "upgrading": An expensive shirt leads to the purchase of an
expensive  suit;  the  car  must  match  the  expensive  home.  An  increase  in  pay
allows  one  to  buy  goods  which  previously  seemed  like  a  luxury.  Another
increase leads to another upgrade. Soon these become a normal part of life and
people  start  identifying  with  them.  When  you  identify  with  an  object,  you're
defined by the object, then controlled by it, and ultimately owned by it. If you
relate to your possessions, you're owned by your stuff, and it will make many of
your decisions for you. This trap is not only mental, but also physical.
When moving into a new place, there's a tendency to rapidly fill all rooms
with furniture (and TVs)--perhaps there's a taboo against empty rooms? Those
extra rooms, which are rarely used--the so-called media rooms, the basement bar,
the craftsroom--are then used for storage space and slowly fill with stuff that
people "need" yet never use. In fact, in many houses, those rooms, like attached
garages, serve no purpose other than storing unused stuff and furniture. This of
course makes it challenging to move into somewhere smaller. In particular, the
very idea of moving is rejected because it requires too much effort. So not only
are people attached to their stuff, they're also attached to their homes.
Continuously accruing stuff soon makes any home too small, regardless of
its  size.  Therefore  much  effort  has  gone  into  optimizing  total  square  footage
including repurposing the garage and parking the car on the street. People don't
seem to realize that the quest to bring more possessions in through the front door
is a chronic disease, and that the shortage of space is a symptom rather than an
underlying  problem.  Consequently,  modern  homes  are  mostly  big,  poorly
constructed, poorly located, and financially leveraged. Like the big gas guzzlers
used to drive back and forth to them, they're very energy-intensive, and thus, in
light of nascent resource constraints, are also outdated and old-fashioned.
Ironically, buying things is often used as a "deserved" reward for hard work:
"Why don't you go and buy yourself something nice?" The idea is that work is
drudgery, so in order to ease the pain, the money earned working is spent on
some gadget, thus requiring more work. This spiral makes little sense, so either
work  isn't  so  bad,  or  perhaps  there  is  another  reason  for  this  behavior.  One
reason may be that many people are salaried full-time employees. They can't
choose to work any less, so they might as well spend the superfluous money they
earn.
As a result, no matter how much someone earns, expenses tend to match
income. This is called lifestyle inflation. Without the wisdom to determine when
enough is enough, consumption is taken to its extreme and people still work as
much as ever, if not more, despite doubling their productivity over the past half
century.
On the homefront the growing use of time-saving technology doesn't result
in time saved either. Rather, it results in more being done. For instance, thanks to
the washing machine, clothes are now washed more than ever before, and as a
result households spend as much time doing laundry as they did before washers
moved into people's homes.14 It seems to be a tragicomic fact that every time-
saving  invention  is  immediately  canceled  out  by  an  increase  in  activity  or  a
change of behavior. When the automobile was made affordable to the masses,
people  moved  further  away  from  work  and  further  away  from  stores.  While
transportation speed increased, transportation distance increased proportionally,
keeping transportation time constant. It did, however, result in the creation of the
auto industry, and thus created jobs.
On the surface, job creation may look positive, but all it has accomplished is
to replace a previously simple and noneconomic activity, such as walking, with
an entire industry of building cars, highways, and oil rigs to accomplish the same
task of getting between places. Cars can go many places, but most trips can just
as easily be done in an hour of walking by choosing one's home location wisely
(see How to find shelter). If you wish to go further, there are other means as
well.
Many other activities which people used to do themselves have also been
turned into products. Consequently, people spend time working to buy products
rather than learning and doing the activity themselves. The result is a downward
spiral of fewer skills -> greater need for technology -> more work -> less time
to practice the remaining skills -> further loss of competence. The more things
consumers think they need, the more control they relinquish over their lives and
the more their lives are shaped by the products they own. Thanks to the focus on
technology, many skills have been forgotten--eggs can't be boiled without egg
boilers, bread can't be toasted without a toaster, and the counter can't be cleaned
without dye-colored chemical products. Walking five miles is now considered an
ordeal to be avoided. Nobody with a conventional frame of mind would spend
one  hour  walking  every  day  when  they  could  drive.  Yet  people  don't  stop  to
reconsider spending 10 weeks each year working full-time to pay for that car just
to avoid the inconvenience of a daily hour of "laborious" walking and fresh air.
This idea of economic growth seems to be a very intricate version of digging
holes and filling them up again. It creates economic growth in the traditional
sense,  but  so  does  breaking  a  window  and  replacing  it.  What  is  ignored  are
wasted effort and natural resources, which should be subtracted from the growth
calculation  to  reveal  a  more  accurate  number  of  how  well  people,  not  the
"economy," are doing.
