As mentioned in Economic classifications, different types dominate a culture during  different  periods. 

It's  possible  to  model  this  change  as  an  ecological succession  of  groups  of  four  different  agent  species--Renaissance  men, businessmen,  salary  men,  and  working  men--where  each  type  feeds  on  the culture created by the previous type, but, in turn, sets up the next dominant type, which eventually will suppress and dominate it. 

In  nature,  succession  is  initiated  by  the  formation  of  new,  unoccupied habitat--for example, through lava flow, wildfires, or colonization. 

If soil is not present, the barren land is first populated by pioneer plants like moss and lichen that can live in cracks, where water and dissolved minerals collect. 

These plants break  down  the  rock  into  its  mineral  components  and  form  soil  when  they decompose. 

The soil, whether already present or formed in the aforementioned process, is populated with annual weeds, which also die and contribute to the soil formation. 

Subsequently, perennial weeds, shrubs, and small trees like aspen or pine take over in competition for resources like sunlight. 

Larger trees, like oak and elm, subsequently block the sunlight for the shorter trees, which die out, and thus the habitat finally reaches what is known as a climax stage or community, which is stable, barring any disruptions such as forest fires or lava flows, which restart the cycle. 

For  an  example  of  succession  that  is  easier  to  relate  to  for  a  "civilized" person,  consider  how  cookie-cutter  housing  developments  easily  populate undeveloped  land,  like  weed  seeds. 

These  dwellings  are  unable  to  survive without cars forming long roots back to shopping centers in the city. 

As suburbia takes hold, strip malls appear closer to the development. 

These draw in more people, which increases the price of land and makes closer-spaced, but higher- quality  homes  more  economical. 

This  in  turn  attracts  small  general  shops, eventually  forming  a  shopping  street  or  downtown  area. 

Sidewalks  appear, followed by multi-story buildings in the city center. 

As the succession proceeds, old species like cars and sprawl are eliminated, eventually leading to the climax community of a city. 

The same thing occurs in the world of ideas. 

A group of people or a single person get a bright idea which is completely different from all other ideas. 

If the idea  has  merit,  other  people  pick  up  the  idea  and  create  their  own  personal variations  on  the  idea,  perhaps  giving  different  names  to  the  same  object,  or perhaps using different methods to arrive at the same conclusion. 

These people  compete for dominance of their ideas, eventually reaching a point where only a handful of different methods are used. 

The next generation uses those methods to discover  new  details,  but  they  don't  compete  on  methodology,  and  hence  it remains  static. 

As  the  intellectual field  matures,  the  rate  at  which  details  are discovered increases. 

As competition grows more intense, the scope of discovery narrows,  specialization  increases,  and  politics  becomes  increasingly  more important, as happens in any complex society where resources--in this case, the number of remaining discoveries to be made--are no longer abundant. 

The idea has reached its climax stage a point where no new understanding occurs; just increasingly smaller adjustments of the details. 

Some observations: Each "species" is adapted to thrive in a very specific environment. 

If  the  conditions  change,  the  existing  species  will  be  outcompeted  by  a species which is better adapted to the new conditions. 

Succession occurs because the dominance of one species gradually changes the environment. 

These are the most important observations. 

Keep in mind that one species may  be  dependent  on  other  species  or  live  together  with  other  species  in communities. 

A  community  is  known  as  a  seral  stage. 

Seral  stages  merge gradually into each other until they reach the climax stage. 

The climax stage is stable, but may change due to external or internal disruptive events (lava flows, the invention of the steam engine).